# taggedPBC scripts

This folder contains scripts to run various analyses on the `taggedPBC`. There are additional README files in this folder that walk through code/processes for particular analyses related to working papers. Below is an updated list of these files and associated scripts.

Minimal requirements to run these Python scripts are listed in the `requirements.txt` file. To install these requirements (ideally in a virtual environment running Python 3.10.12), simply:

```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Some additional requirements for particular scripts (to rerun analyses using external tools such as `SpaCy` and `Trankit`, for example) may require additional installations via `pip` or your package manager of choice.

List of readme files and associated scripts:

- [annotating_readme.md](annotating_readme.md) outlines the steps involved in creating the `taggedPBC`. It also describes the code (`annotating_taggedPBC.py`) used to assess the validity of the tags generated by the word alignment models and validate the N1 ratio against classifications of word order in typological databases. This measure is then used to train a classifier to impute word order, identifying basic word order for languages in the `taggedPBC` that are not classified by existing typological databases. More detail on this process can be found in the paper:
    - Ring, Hiram. The *taggedPBC*: Annotating a massive parallel corpus for crosslinguistic investigations. arXiv:submit/6443708


- [wordlength_readme.md](wordlength_readme.md) assesses the relationship between word order (as imputed for languages in the `taggedPBC` by the N1 ratio classifier described in the `annotating_readme`) and lengths of nouns and verbs. The `wordlength_taggedPBC.py` script runs various statistical analyses to assess how meaningful these relationships are. I show that a classifier trained solely on properties related to word order can predict the word order of historical languages solely on the basis of tagged corpora. Additionally, length of nouns and verbs are statistically significant even when geography and linguistic area are taken into account. These findings are outlined in the paper:
    - Ring, Hiram. Word length predicts word order: "Min-Max"-ing drives language evolution.


The folder structure is as follows:

- The `analysis` folder contains code to conduct ANOVAs, get statistics and patterns from the *tagged PBC*, and train classifiers for imputing word order.

- The `checks` folder contains code for checking the tags in the tagged PBC against existing POS taggers and hand-annotated data, as well as assessing how lengths of Nouns/Verbs predicts word order in (historical) corpora and differentiates word order in relation to descent from a common ancestor. It contains subfolders:  
  - `glottolog`: a folder containing data files sourced from Glottolog with language family and geographic information for the ISO codes in the dataset.
  - `results`: a folder containing correspondence results from comparison of tags with relevant repositories, and results from hierarchical linear regression models.
  - `tag_models`: a folder containing model language codes for the trained taggers.
  - `test_hist`: a folder with code to test word order classification of Ancient/Modern Hebrew and Classical/Egyptian Arabic based on Noun and Verb lengths in corpora.


- The `data` folder contains multiple subfolders:  
  - `output`: a folder to store statistical test results and plots created by scripts in this repository.
  - `tagged`: a folder containing the 1599 POS-tagged portions of Bibles from the PBC (including 2 conlangs).
  - `translation`: a folder containing data used for developing the tagged corpus.
  - `word_order`: a folder containing spreadsheets with word order information from three typological databases (Autotyp, Grambank, WALS). Data that was tagged with a Glottocode has been cross-referenced to identify each language with an ISO 639-3 code.


- The `processing` folder contains code that was used to develop the *tagged PBC*. This code makes use of various data found in the `data` folder.
